High in this video we're going to look at rounding up floats.
So we have the ROUND function which is available in Python.
It's built in.
You don't have to import it from the math library or anything and it takes in one parameter at least
mandatory which is the number we want to round.
And then another parameter and that defaults to 0 that specifies you know the arm multiples of ten that
we want to round to.
So that's what we'll wrap our heads around what that means exactly is actually pretty straightforward.
So you might think of it if you see around 1.2 3Com a one as we all.
You're rounding the number to 1 digit after the decimal point.
And that's correct.
That's true but and can also be negative.
And so it's not really just number of digits after the decimal point that we can run to it's number
of digits before the decimal point.
And in fact what it means is that we are rounding to multiples of powers of 10.
Be negative or positive.
We'll take a look at that in some detail.
So the round function is the last way that we looked at.
Of course it floats to integers.
So remember we had truncation with cieling we have flow and now we also have round.
And so we can use any of those methods to cause a floating point number or a non-integer number to an
integer numbers an integral number.
So one thing to point out are if end is not specified it defaults to 0.
And so when we round with just the number but no n will get an integer back.
We're going around to a power of 10 to the negative zero which is one right tend to the zero is 1.
So we're going around to a multiple of one which are the integers integers all multiples of 1.
So when we do that the round function will actually return an int data type.
So if we call round X for any valid or acceptable number here we'll get an int back.
However if you actually specify n then you'll get the same type that you use to call in.
So if X was a float we'll get a float back if X was an int.
Get an int back course you probably wouldn't pass in an int with an end that's positive.
It doesn't make sense but you might want to pass an int with a negative number n right and we'll we'll
see examples of that later what that means.
Now it also does mean that if you call round X-Com zero were actually specified.
And in this case even though it's going to round x to an integral number.
Now that would do a whole number.
It would be the same type that was passed in.
So if you use the float they'll get a float back.
So if you round 1.2 three you'll get one back which is the integer 1.
If you round one point two three commas 0 you'll get 1 point 0 or 1 as a float back.
Small distinction.
And you know usually again in python we don't really care that much about the data types.
Mean it just works and we don't have to.
You know unlike other languages have static typing.
So that's why we don't have to worry about it too much.
But it's there just in case you need to know.
So let's look at an example.
Let's start with an equal to zero which means what we're looking at the closest multiple of 10 to the
negative and then to the negative zero which is 1.
So we're looking at the closest multiples of 1 What are multiples of 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 0.
Negative One negative to negative 3 and so on.
It's all the integers.
So in fact what we're going to do is look at this on a number line much easier to see what's happening
there.
So the two contenders that we have all one and two there are multiples of one and there are two numbers
that are around 1.2 threes.
So one point two three sets in this interval one to two and two round.
We therefore have to find the closest one.
So we have to look at the distance between X and those two and we find that the closest one is one.
So when we call round one point two three we'll get one.
OK.
So pretty straightforward.
Nothing very fancy here.
That's called rounding to the closest but the closest What multiple of.
Powers of 10.
So for this case an equal to zero.
We're looking to go to the closest multiples of 1.
Now we can look at and greater than zero.
Let's look at unequals one.
So we're rounding to the closest multiple of 10 to the negative 1 which is zero point 1.
So we're going to look at multiples of 0.1 what are multiples of 0.1 while 0 0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3.
And on the negative side negative 0.1 negative 0.2 negative 0.3 and so forth.
Again let's just look at a number line.
So if we look at X equals 1.2 three then the two numbers that are going to be contenders for this are
1.2 1.3 multiples of 0.1.
Again we have to look at the distance and again as we can see one point two three is closer to one point
two.
And so therefore the round of one point two three come of one will give us one point to back.
So now let's look at negative numbers.
It works just as easily so any equals negative 1.
Now remember we're looking at closest multiples of 10 to the negative end.
So that means turn to the negative negative 1 which is 10 to 1 which is just 10.
So when we specify and equals negative 1 we're rounding to the closest multiples of ten.
If we had any call to negative two would be wrong to the closest multiples of 100 with an equal to negative
3 closest multiples of a thousand and so on.
So this end is very flexible and allows us to work both ways.
First take a look at eighteen point two and we're going to want to run to the closest multiple of 10.
So again on a number line what are the two contenders.
10 and 20.
These are both multiples of 10 and eighteen point two sits right between them.
Again we have to look at the closest one.
So we look at the distances and we find that 20 is the closest so round of eighteen point to common
negative one will return 20.
It's the closest number and you can walk with high values of an in the negative direction as well.
Now one thing I didn't talk about all ties ties is what really causes some of the issues with this the
closest.
That's easy.
But look at this example here.
Let's look at sequels one point to five.
And let's assume we're working with multiples of 0.1 and equal to 1 then the two contenders are 1.2
1.3 What's the distance now 0.05 0.05.
It's the same distance.
So what's the round equal to.
Right.
We don't have a closest value.
There is no cost as the value.
So we need a tiebreaker we need to figure out where we need to decide.
Well which one are we going to pick.
Now typically we would expect 1.5 to run to 1.3 that's kind of what we've grown up with what we learnt
in school and we just always round up and that's called rounding up now a better terminology than rounding
up is called rounding a way from zero.
Because if you round 1.2 5 up to 1.3 you've moved just a little bit away from zero.
Right.
So we're running away from zero.
And the reason why it's a better terminology becomes more apparent when we look at negative numbers
as those pesky negative numbers they always cause problems.
So if we have a round of negative 1.2 five come a one we would expect the result to be negative 1.3.
In other words we've rounded down.
We've rounded away from zero.
Right.
We were at negative 1.2 five and we've now moved a slight step away from there.
So let's step away from zero down to negative 1.3.
So instead of saying we're rounding up the positive rounding down negatives we can just say we're rounding
away from zero.
That's why it's a better terminology it's consistent between those two.
So this type of rounding is called rounding to the nearest.
That's how we run.
And then we have to specify the tiebreakers with ties away from zero.
So that's a standard way of rounding the one that we're just used to.
However here's what happens if you write this in python round 1.2 five common one and Python is not
the only language that does that.
Many others do it as well.
If we round one point two five to one decimal point and equals to 1 we don't get 1.3 back 1.2 back.
Fuck Oh.
So it's rounding down right.
Sort of rounded towards zero not away from zero.
What's going on.
Well how about round 1.3 five.
While that's 1.4.
That rounded away from zero.
What's going on.
You know it doesn't seem very consistent away from 0 to 1 0.
Right.
This one.
Yeah.
OK.
That's what we would do.
But this 1.2 now we expect at expected 1.3 and the same thing happens with negative numbers.
If you look at negative 1.2 vibe you get negative 1.2 which was towards zero and negative 1.3 5 you
get negative 1.4 which was away from zero as well.
So something's going on here.
It's not the standard rounding algorithm and that's why I said Tai's can be pesky because you have different
ways of determining and defining how you deal with tides.
Everything is going on to the closest value.
So if you don't have a tie then the round works just as expected.
But when you have a time when you have a problem so what's going on.
Well let's look at something called banker's rounding.
That's kind of the common term for what we just saw.
And it's basically specified in the Tripoli 1754 standard.
You can go look it up if you want.
But essentially here's how it works.
It runs to the nearest value.
So it's the regular you know causes value.
But it ties for ties.
They're rounded to the nearest value which haven't even least significant digit.
What does that mean.
Let's look at the example that's the easiest way to understand what's going on here.
So here we have 1.2 five and we're using an end of one again which means the two contenders are 1.2
or 1.3.
So we need to find the closest one in this case we have a tie.
And so what we do is we look at the least significant digit which in this case here is two.
And this case here is three and we round then to the one that's even.
So in this case to me is even three As'ad right.
So two is even.
Which means that when we round 1.2 5 come a one we're going to return 1.2 to if we look at exit to 1.3
fire then one point three five sets between 1.3 and 1.4 again.
It's equidistance we have a tie.
And the least significant digit for here is even is odd.
So since 4 is even right we only look at the last at the least significant digit for even.
Which means that we're going to pick 1.4 for the round.
And in fact that's what it returns and returns 1.4.
So this is called banker's rounding.
Now why do we do that.
Why not just use the round away from zero.
The way that you know we're kind of used to let's look at an example of an equal to negative one so
we round to the closest multiple of 10 to the negative negative one which is 10.
Right.
So we're going around to the closest multiples of 10.
So let's take a look at equal to 15.
And on the number line it means that we want to you know the two contenders are 10 and 20.
Again the distance is equidistant.
We have five right.
So we have a tie.
So how do we define the tie.
We look at the least significant digit the least significant digit Here is one it's to the zeros don't
count.
Remember that leading trailing zeros don't count.
So two is even.
So 20 is going to be our choice.
And so when we round 15 with a negative one for n we get 20 back on the other hand if we did 25 which
sits between 20 and 30 that distance is also five it's equidistant.
And we have a tie the two here in the 20.
Right.
The least significant digit to in the 20 is even the three in here is odd.
So we pick but even one will always have one even one.
And so we do that and therefore we'll return 20 as well.
So that's kind of surprising if we round 15 will get 20.
We're around 25.
We'll also get 20.
So it's kind of sometimes we round away from 0 sometimes we're down towards zero.
OK.
It's kind of going to be hopefully evenly spread since we're picking the even one and we always have
either even or odd you know digits.
Now why do that.
Why do bankers rounding.
Well it's less biased than always taking ties away from 0 and consider this let's wait.
Averaging three numbers and this really comes into play when you're let's say doing a lot of computations
with numbers.
And banks do that right.
They add up amount maybe they calculate interest rates and they need to round two.
Let's say two digits after the decimal point and if each time they round and let's say that you know
your you interest you earned for that month rounds and let's say you were at one point to five then
you're going to actually get rounded to one point.
Well that's one digit.
That said if they wanted one digit one point to five is going around to 1.3 one point three five is
going around to 1.4.
Well each time they're giving you that you know point 0 five extra bit of interest that you didn't actually
on when you're at times right.
When you're on time.
And so what happens is that if you have billions of transactions well that decimal dust builds up pretty
quick.
In fact that's how some people think that they can skim from banks.
Right you basically kind of you know skim off the decimal dust after rounding and you can make a lot
of money because you have a lot of transactions.
So that's the problem of running away from zero is that you know you kind of have this bias where you're
dealing with a set of positive numbers and you're always running away from zero and you add that up
you're starting to move further and further away from the true addition.
So we can look at that in a simplistic way by looking at these three numbers and let's say we want to
average these three numbers.
So if we average them well the sum is 4.5 divided by three.
So the average is 1.5.
Now let's say that we want to find the arm.
Get around first and then average Let's see what happens.
So using standard rounding 0.5 would become one 1.5 would be 2 2.5 would be 3.
If we find that average we get six divided by three which is 2.
On the other hand if we use banker's rounding 0.5 will round 2 0 1.5 will round 2 2 and 2.5 will also
ramp to 2.
Every time we're rounding to the even so if we take a look at the average the sum divided by 3 is 1.3
recurring which is a little closer to 1.5 than 2 watts.
So this is what we mean by it's less biased than always moving away from zero.
And in certain cases banking for example it's really really important that you consider those kinds
of problems you know and in finance as well.
You want to be careful and even in numerical computations you want to be careful that you don't you're
rounding errors don't accumulate too much.
And so if you have a biased way of rounding then you're going to further exacerbate the rounding errors
in the rounding issues.
So Bengal's round rounding is a pretty good way of getting rid of that bias.
It doesn't necessarily get rid of it but at least it tries to get rid of it.
Now if you really insist on rounding away from zero.
Well that's not built into Python.
Right.
Your round is using banker's rounding.
So what can we do.
Well a common way that comes up on the internet you'll find is this.
They'll say Oh just take X plus 0.5 and then truncate it right.
And that kind of works.
Ten point three if you take that into a ten point three plus 0.5 you get into ten point eight which
is 10 right.
So we just ran a ten point three to 10 with a ten point nine while ten point five to 0.5 adds up to
eleven point four of would take the truncation of that we get 11 so ten point nine was rounded to 11.
That kind of walks ten point five.
Right.
We get ten point five closer 0.5 which is 11.
We truncate that.
We get 11 fall back kind of walks to ten point five rounded up to 11.
So we're good now there are a couple of problems with this however.
One is that this is only really valid for rounding to integers right.
But if you want other powers of 10 you'd have a more complicated way of doing this.
The other thing too is that it doesn't work with negative numbers and very often people forget about
negative numbers.
And if you're dealing with values that you know are always going to be positive then this might work
for you.
And if you're trying to find a quick way of doing this round away from 0 4 positive numbers and you're
rounding to integers by all means this works fine.
This is great.
However if numbers could be negative you'll run into a problem that's not going to work.
Let's look at negative ten point three.
If we rounding our away from zero.
We should expect to get negative 10 but if we look at the end of negative ten point three plus 0.5 which
is what this formula was we get into negative nine point eight which is negative nine.
Not what we expected.
So it doesn't work and negative ten point nine that will actually round to negative 10.
Again not what we expected not what we want.
The problem here is that we needed to switch for a negative number.
This needed to switch to a negative 0.5 and a net a minus 0.5.
Then it would work.
But now we have this thing of well if x is positive then at 0.5 if x is negative subtract 0.5 and then
truncate right.
So you have to be careful it's not quite straightforward enough.
And then the negative ten point five also runs the negative turns.
Same problem there.
So this is an acceptable rounding method that that's fine.
This is called Rounding toward plus infinity.
In other words we always round up right even with negative numbers.
We'll round up
but of course we still have to be careful.
Right.
We have problems here surrounding two wars plus infinity is fine.
That is an acceptable way of rounding.
And when we get to the section on decimals We'll take a look at that as well in more detail because
all these ranting mechanisms are actually implemented in the decimal library.
When you deal with decimal numbers they are not however implemented in the floats.
So this works but it's not rounding towards zero.
So if you really insist on rounding away from 0 Let's see how we can do it.
So here's how we want to think about it.
We first want to strip the sign of X away.
Forget about the sign for going with.
But whether it's negative or positive so take the absolute value of x at 0.5 to it and then truncate
it.
So basically what we had before in the last slide except that we have to take the absolute value of
x and then after we have that result put back the sign.
Now what's the sign of X sign of x is simply a function that returns 1 if x is greater than or equal
to zero and returns negative 1 if X is less than zero.
Now if you use two math to the signum function this is not the same as the signum function has got a
little difference right.
We don't have a zero value for x equal to zero.
It's a little different.
So be careful there.
So let's take a look at an example of how this actually works.
So let's say we have ten point four then the sign of X's plus right so the sign of X is going to be
1.
Now absolute rule of X plus 0.5 will be ten point nine.
We get ten point four percent 0.5 the integer value of that is 10.
And if we multiply sign of X which will be 1 since we have a positive times this we get 10.
So we are ten point four got rounded down to 10 most of it ten point five ten point five.
We expect when we're running away from 0 that it's going to go up to the next number so it's going to
go up to 11.
Right because we have a tie.
And so we're going to go away from zero.
Again the sign is positive it will be a value of 1.
The absolute value here of X is ten point five point zero point five.
We get one we truncate that.
We get 11.
Multiply that by 1 we get 11.
So we have the right result.
Let's look at ten point six.
Well the same thing that's positive.
So the sign will be one of the absolute values 11 you know.
That's ten point six percent 0.5 is eleven point one with truncated multiply by 1.
We got 11.
Everything works good so far.
But these positive numbers.
Now we need to also make sure that works for negative numbers.
So negative ten point four that's a negative.
So the sign is going to be negative 1 the absolute value.
Well it's going to be ten point four plus 0.5.
So ten point nine and now we get when we truncate we get 10.
We multiply that now by the negative one and we get negative 10.
So that was negative ten point four rounded to negative 10 and rounded away from zero.
Let's look at negative ten point five which is the tie again to negative values we'll have minus 1 for
the sign.
The absolute value plus 0.5 is 11.
When we truncate that we get 11 and we multiply that by negative 1 to get our result which is negative
11.
Again that worked the tiebreaking rounded away from zero.
That's what we wanted.
With negative 10:26 this would just run to the closest Just like negative ten point four or ten point
four and ten point six right.
It's only four times that we have to decide whether it would go away from zero or not.
So negative ten point six is negative.
We do the calculation 11 and we end up with negative 11.
So this works right.
Negative ten point four on the negative 10 negative ten point five to negative 11 negative ten point
six to negative 11.
And positives work as well.
Now I do want to point out that this formula here is also the same thing as doing this as taking the
sign of X multiplying that by 0.5 and adding that to x.
Basically we're saying do we want to add or remove 0.5 from the value before we truncate that's equivalent.
And so this might be a little easier to code.
Here we only have a single kind of special function called Sign whereas here we have the sign and the
absolute value.
So a little more efficient.
Now Python doesn't have a sine function.
But it does have a function in the math module called copy sign.
Now how does the copy assign work while copy sign takes two parameters x and y and it returns the magnitude
with the absolute value of x.
But with the sign of Y.
So in other words if we do sign of X that's the same thing as saying copy sign of the sign of X and
apply it to one that will then return either negative one plus one.
Right.
If x is greater than or equal to zero the sign here will be one.
So we'll get one back and if it's negative We'll get the negative one back so we can use that one.
So let's look at this formula again which was that original formula will have that.
And we can write the Python code.
Right.
So we have to grab the absolute and the copy sign methods and then we can just return copy sign 1 comma
x that will be the sign of X times the end.
The truncation right essentially of the absolute value of x Clozaril point five.
That will work just fine.
But a simpler way to look at it is using these alternative way.
And here we can just say end of X plus copy sine 0.5 comma x.
So that works the same way and we'll see that in the code that they're equivalent.
It's just a different way of writing it which is a lot simpler.
All right.
So thanks for watching.
And in the next video we'll jump right into the code.
So you innovate.